This meeting to order of December 8th, 2025.
Uh, and I'll ask Superintendent Entwistle to take the order.
Uh, the call to order.
DeAngelos Here.
DeAngelos. Dialing here. Feller. Here. Holman.
Here. Richardson. Here. Rich. Here. Smith. Here.
Camina Davidson.
Ka. He's, he's on his way. Kaa. He's on his way. Yeah.
Okay. Here. Great. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, for those of us who are willing
or interested, you may join us for the Pledge of Allegiance,
pledge Allegiance. Allegiance
To the flag of the United States of America,
and to the Republic for which it stands,
one Nation under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for all.
Thank you. Uh,
just as an opening statement, um,
as this is a public meeting,
unless the board specifically votes
to enter into executive session, the public has the right
to hear everything and to look at all exhibits.
Please let us know if you experience any difficulties
with accessibility.
We have members of the district staff available
to help you with that.
The school board works from a prepared agenda,
which is posted in advance on the district website,
and printed copies of this evening's agenda are available
near the entrance to the lecture hall.
Uh, fellow board members, please remember,
Robert's rules states, I think so
that members may speak no more than twice on the same
question, uh, except by permission of the board chair.
I'm very liberal about that.
Uh, questions, brief suggestions
or points of clarification are not
counted as speaking in debate.
And the board asks that the public audience refrain from
clapping, booing side comments,
or other behaviors that would
interrupt the flow of speakers.
Every person is entitled to speak their opinion
and to feel safe in the process.
Thank you. So, uh, just as a report
of the chair, uh, to first say, uh, welcome to everybody.
This is my first formal meeting,
so I appreciate everybody being patient
and understanding that I might have some glitches
as we go along, but, uh, I'll do the best I can.
The second thing I wanted to say is we just moments ago,
sign the contract with the ed techs and the clerks.
And so I wanna thank President, uh, DeSanto
and all the members of that unit
for finalizing that contract.
So thank you for that.
Thank you. Uh, there are important dates
and information for the board and the public to be aware.
So, uh, Wednesday, December 10th, we will have a workshop,
and it will be in this location.
It will be on the superintendent search.
So there are three search committees,
main school management, uh, the New England,
nasdaq, uh, will present, and Zeal will present.
And those, uh, all that information is up on the website.
So it's public and it's available for everyone.
There are the, the, uh, their slide presentations
and their, um, financial proposals for their work.
So we will do that on Wednesday of this week, um,
at six o'clock.
The, I mean, I'm sorry, five o'clock.
So the first presentation will be main school management.
That will be at five o'clock.
Uh, NS EQ will go at six o'clock,
and Zeal will go at seven o'clock.
There'll be opportunity in between those presentations for
the board to, uh, ask questions of the presenter.
And then at the conclusion of the three presenters,
there will be an opportunity for public comments.
So I encourage you to be here.
This will be the first step in our search
for a new superintendent.
And, um, if the board
is prepared that night to make a decision about those,
which search committee, uh, it would like to hire,
then we will go into a regular meeting to take that action
and, um, make that vote.
Because we can't do that in a workshop if the board is not
ready to do that.
Um, then we will do it at a December 17th meeting,
which I'm gonna talk about also.
So, um, we will have the December 17th
at the request of superintendent ENT whistle.
We'll have a budget workshop.
Um, and that will also be held in these, in,
in the lecture hall.
And, uh, is of course a public meeting.
And it will begin at 6:00 PM That's, uh, in
italics because it's been, was added
to the agenda this afternoon.
There will be a board workshop on Robert's Rules of order,
and, uh, that will be Wednesday, January 7th.
That will be at five 15.
And it will be in the Learning Commons.
Also a public meeting.
Anyone who is so inclined to want
to learn about Robert's rules, that's your opportunity.
Um, and there will be our regular meeting on
January 12th, excuse me.
And then we will have a board workshop on, uh, the Freedom
of Access Act on January 14th
at 6:00 PM in the Learning Commons.
And that will be until seven 30.
So, um, those are just important dates for board members to
put on their calendar.
And, uh, to be aware.
The last thing I have on my report is I wanted
to welcome new, new board members, uh, Daniel Fowler,
district One, George Rich, district four,
and Tyler Smith District two,
and to give them an opportunity to introduce themselves,
say anything about themselves
that they want, or nothing at all.
There's no requirement here, but, um,
but I'm gonna turn that to the three of you
and whoever would like to go first,
if somebody wants to go first.
Tyler, did you Sure. Since, since it was your request. Yeah.
Why don't you go first. Okay.
Yeah. I, I just prepared a, a few remarks to Sure.
Introduce myself to everybody. I know.
I've met a few of you, but not everybody.
Um, so my name's Tyler.
I currently worked as an arborist for Bartlett Tree Experts.
Um, before
that I worked in various education spaces for six years.
So first as a high school teacher,
and then in, um, a couple Boston nonprofits.
One of those nonprofits was based in East Boston, where I
provided in-school supplemental literacy support
to middle school English teachers, as well as support
for their parents and navigating BPS.
Um, and then in the second role, I was a grant manager
for an organization that provided grants
and technical assistance, um, to a, a lot
of schools in BPS and some charter schools.
Uh, during my time in Boston, I also, uh,
got a Master's in Education policy
and management, which unfortunately,
I'm still paying off even though I don't
work in education anymore.
So, um, my wife and I moved to Maine in 2021,
and we're lucky enough to buy a house here in
South Portland in 2022.
Um, and we have a 2-year-old
who will be in South Portland schools in just a few years.
Um, to say a little bit about why I am here, um,
so I've been watching these school board meetings
and just following the district from
afar for the last few years.
And it was really clear to me
that the district had strong leadership
at almost every level.
Um, from teachers to school admin to district admin, um,
and a really engaged community of parents,
which gives me a lot of optimism for
what our schools will look like, um,
in a few years when my son and his peers start kindergarten.
But, um, I also felt like the school board, uh,
hasn't lived up to the bar
that those working in our schools have set.
So I saw this opening of a seat in my district
as a good opportunity to help change that.
Um, I feel like we're facing a lot
of challenges over the next three years.
It's not gonna be like an easy fun time up here.
Um, there's gonna be a lot of budget challenges,
which we'll talk about tonight.
Superintendent search a state funding formula
that's underfunding our district.
Um, and a federal education department that's kind
of abdicating its role as a protector
of our most vulnerable students.
So I think it's really important that what we do
as a board over the next year especially,
is developing a strong process for decision making
and a clear vision for our schools
that can guide those decisions.
Um, over the past few months, it's been clear that,
you know, superintendent Entwistle
and the returning members of the board have started with
that work, and I'm encouraged about that.
Um, but I think it's important
that it remains our focus over the next few months, uh,
in every one of our meetings.
And that everyone here is committed to learning, listening,
and putting in the work required to, to do that.
I think it's gonna be really important.
Um, and I also think we need
to include the entire community in this process from
teachers, staff, admin, parents, and students.
Um, you guys are the one doing this work.
I've only been here for a few years
and got to watch things from afar,
so I haven't been in the schools,
and I don't know what things look like on a day to day.
So, um, I would really like to, you know,
if you could introduce yourself.
Anybody out there who'd want to talk, I, um,
would love to hear your perspective.
And I've got open ears and, um, yeah,
don't hesitate to reach out.
So, looking forward to get started. Sorry if that was long.
No, not, not at all. Thank you. Board member Smith.
Uh, and do would like to go, uh, member F Yeah,
Hard to follow Tyler.
It's really nice. Um, I'm Daniel.
Uh, I moved here in 2021, like Tyler did, uh, with my wife.
Um, I have a, I work in medical artificial intelligence.
I have a PhD in biomedical informatics.
I'm a big data nerd,
and I, I do wear the nerd kind of identity very proudly.
Um, I've been involved in a number of different non-profits.
The one I'm most closely involved in is called Res.
And we've put a hundred, uh,
educational orchards in Maine schools.
Um, so that's been really gratifying.
And part of the reason that, uh, I wanted
to get involved with the school board.
Um, you know, why I'm here.
Uh, I feel like I owe so much in my life to my education,
and I just want to make sure that, um, you know,
today's youth get the opportunity that I had as a kid.
And I think it's a probably a really challenging time
to be a student and a really
challenging time to be a teacher.
Um, you know, with technology in the classroom
and all the distractions on our attention,
I just can't imagine what it's like
to be in a classroom now.
And, and I'm kind of curious about what AI is gonna do
to education in the future.
Um, so that, that's a, a real area of interest of mine.
Um, I don't really have an agenda.
Um, I just really wanna listen to folks
and represent their voices well.
I think, you know, I really wanna make
sure teachers are supported here.
Having a good teacher is, is like nothing else.
Um, but yeah.
So I, I hope to, um, make some friends
and, uh, be a part of this community.
So thanks for, uh, for helping me. Thanks.
Thank you. Member Fowler and Member Rich.
I'm George. I didn't bring a pen
or any kind of notebook, so this is by the seat of my pants.
Um, a friend of mine asked me to run for the school board,
and I gladly said yes.
Um, but I have the support of the community, you know, I,
I went around and talked to everybody and,
and saw their sort of concerns
as we gather our, our signatures.
And I, I heard a few themes.
Um, but basically I'm here to make sure that the kids have
the, uh, opportunities that my kids had,
you know, at least something like it.
They really like this school,
and I believe in South Portland and the teachers.
I just wanna give you guys the support that you need.
Thank you.
Thank you, member Rich.
And we will now go to the student representative,
um, member Kabi.
So,
Hello everyone.
Um, I hope everybody had a great Thanksgiving break,
and hopefully you had good, delicious food.
Um, I would also first like
to welcome our new school board members.
I really hope to work with you in the last six months
that I'll be, you know, in this board.
So I hope to make new connections
and get to know more about your goals
and being in the school board.
But, um, starting off
with the high school South Portland High School hosted its
fifth annual SoPo, US chess rated tournament
with 42 players from over 11 schools.
And South Portland earned a total of 13 points
and is currently at the top of the state.
Leaderboard. Very proud of my school. Mm-hmm.
Um, and last week, on December 4th
and fifth, students also had the chance to take the seal
of Biliteracy exam with languages rang, ranging from French,
Portuguese to Spanish, Arabic,
and many more other languages,
and some few upcoming dates
to know going on at the high school.
There will be a vocal music concert,
which is on December 9th, tomorrow at 7:00 PM I have
to check more about the location,
but I'm assuming it's at the auditorium.
Um, and for high schoolers,
quarter three will be beginning on January 20th.
So we have like a really, quarter two is short this year
for some reason, but yeah.
Um, and in athletics, seven out
of eight varsity teams have made postseason play This fall
field hockey reached the quarterfinals
for the first time since 2010.
And both cross country teams have qualified for state meets.
And winter sports are now underway
with 222 students participating.
Moving on to the middle school South Berlin Middle School
continues to, uh, continues its work on reading
and writing interventions,
and is now preparing for the WNBA assessments.
The year will be wrapping up with the Shark Fest
and a schoolwide community community, uh,
a schoolwide Community Day.
And some enrichment programs are also expanding with karate
and cheerleading added alongside basketball.
I wish I had that when I went to middle school.
Um, and moving on to the elementary school, all
of them had something in common, which they went
to go watch a little mermaid performance at the middle
school, which was performed by middle schoolers.
I find that very cute. Um,
but at Dyer Elementary, they held their, uh,
well-attended assembly, recognizing responsibility
and their annual food tradi Family Tradition night is coming
up on December 10th,
and the PTA will be running a food drive to support families
at small elementary Students earn their second schoolwide
celebration by collecting feathers for positive behavior,
and they choose a hat day.
The PTA has been busy with a movie night, a food drive,
and the Mill Creek Tree Lighting,
and the school, the small school Winter Fest.
And some recent highlights were the,
they had a children's museum trip
and obviously the Little Mermaid performance.
Um, at Skill in fourth grade,
fourth graders have been taking on leadership roles every
Friday afternoon, helping in classrooms,
mentoring other younger students, and supporting staff,
and meeting the Civil Rights team as well.
Meeting with the Civil, civil rights team, sorry about that.
Um, and Fall conferences were also very,
uh, very well attended.
And also they went to go see the Little Mermaid performance.
And with Brown School, they had a book fair
during conferences, which was a very big success.
The school raised $961, and they added 35 new library books.
They also received $564 in donation through Share the Fair,
and those funds will help bring an author to visit
and talk to the students.
Uh, the PTA family dinner on November 18th was also very
well attended, and they went to go see the little roommate.
Um, lastly, wrapping up with adult education.
They will be, uh,
wrapping up a very successful fall semester,
celebrating two new high set graduates, which also,
they were South Portland High School graduates as well.
And they will be having a collaboration
with new nutrition director Kate Turner,
which will be allowing, uh, hospitality cares
to visit South Point High School cafeteria
and learn firsthand about the K
through 12 food service operation.
And that includes my update.
Thank you very much. Any questions?
Any questions from board members for, uh, member kbi?
So, seeing none that you, did you
Have, there's a thumbs up.
Uh, thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, next we will go to the report of the superintendent.
We're gonna start this evening, um, with a remembrance of,
uh, Bruce Cribby, um, uh, who was an employee here.
He passed away on November 23rd.
Um, he, uh, in fact was employed here for 26 years.
And as his obituary, OO obituary read,
he was known for his warm presence, uh, reliability
and genuine care for the students
and their families he served over the years.
And what more could you say about a bus driver?
That's, um, just all the things that you want to hear.
Um, Mike is here tonight to, um, to say a few words, uh, uh,
in remembrance of, of Bruce Cribby.
Good evening, uh, for the new folks, I'm Mike Nally.
I'm the Director of Operations and Safety.
And in that capacity, I oversee
the transportation department.
Thank you for this opportunity
to offer a few words about Bruce.
I'm certainly speaking on behalf
of the full transportation team,
and then the wider South Portland School department.
As mentioned, Bruce was the second longest tenured member
of our team, serving for 26 years as a bus driver.
His passing was unexpected, and it's been a really sad
and challenging week, couple weeks for our team.
A couple things come to mind when I think about Bruce.
First and foremost, he was intensely dedicated to his job,
and more importantly, intensely dedicated
to serving the students of South Portland.
He embodied what we tried to instill in all our drivers,
singularly focused on getting the kids
safely to where they need to be.
And he did it for all our students.
Regular bus runs, extracurricular activities
outta district transportation.
Middle of the night runs to Logan Airport. Bruce did it all.
Bruce was omnipresent in the bus barn.
He was a fixer in the break room.
Got to work early every morning to chat with coworkers
and always free to offer his opinion
and occasionally offer his director critical feedback.
Since he was around so often,
Bruce was an invaluable member of our team.
He was always available and willing to scoop up a kid
who may have missed the bus fill in when a coworker was out,
and generally help out whenever needed.
Having grown up in the garage industry, he was,
he was very much at ease in our garage,
where he'd constantly volunteer to help our two mechanics.
With keeping the fleet road ready
and safe from parts runs to turning wrenches.
Bruce was a force multiplier for our maintenance team.
Bruce also had a GPS in his brain with 26 years
of experience driving the driving
seemingly every road in Maine.
He shared his vast knowledge with the new drivers.
My first year with Bruce, he was driving a sports team on a
cold winter night with potential snow in the forecast.
And I casually mentioned to him on the way out the door,
Hey, drive safe tonight.
He immediately gave me a chapter
and verse description of his intended route complete
with noting certain side roads that he was planning to take
to avoid dangerous hills and other potential hazard hazards.
I was pretty impressed. I had a chance to chat
with his kids at Bruce's celebration
of life ceremony on Saturday.
And they reaffirmed what we all knew to be true,
that Bruce loved being a bus driver,
and the job was a true source of identity to him.
Bruce was a pleasure to work with
and will be sorely missed by all of us.
Thank you very much for this opportunity.
Thank you very much, Mr. Nelly.
And just an opportunity,
if there's anyone else in the audience who wanted
to speak on behalf of Bruce or any board members.
So I will just say, uh, I was a teacher at the high school,
and, uh, my last year
or two when I finished was the beginning of Bruce's term
as a a, a bus driver.
And so I remember him as a younger Bruce Cribby, but, uh,
but I was younger as well.
So, uh, but I,
but I know that he was just, as you described, Mr.
Nally and very dedicated, very committed to his work,
and really loved by the kids.
So, uh, I thank you very much for remembering him today.
And, uh, back to you superintendent.
Sure. Um, so the next is a shout out to Erin Vicki
and her folks in adult education.
Um, uh, it's, we were notified
that South Portland Adult Education, um, is a,
is an adult education top performer
for FY 25.
And, uh, that's defined up there.
On the, on the slide, a top performer is a program
that is met or exceeded the state target in measurable
skills gained and other performance targets.
South Portland adult education has met three out of the four
of the state's, uh, performance targets I'll share
with the board, um, a copy, there's two of them.
I'll send them each way of the notification from the state
so that everyone has a chance to see that.
So again, um, much appreciation to our, uh,
adult education staff.
I think, um, someone has already stole the, uh, my,
my thunder on this one, but South Portland Education Support
Professionals Association, S-P-E-S-P-A
contract has been ratified, uh, by the membership
and the school board job well done.
Um, we have a couple of reports, uh, as well.
The first is, um, extended learning opportunities, um,
or ELO is, it's as it's, uh, called Update.
And this is from Justine Carlisle, um, jobs
for Maine graduates.
And, uh, ELO Navigator. Welcome, Justine. Thank.
Hi, good evening. My name is Justine Carlisle.
I work with JMG, and I'm the ELO
specialist at the high school.
Um, I'm really excited to be here to share
and thank you for this opportunity.
I also have Destiny, Peter, who's with me.
She's this senior and she's gonna talk a little bit about
her experience in the program as well.
Um, I thought I would just define quickly
what an ELO is in case there are people listening from home
who haven't heard this acronym before.
But the way we have defined it in the district,
it is a four credit opportunity for students
that includes hands-on learning
outside the traditional classroom.
Um, and it has a community partner connection as well.
It's kind of an umbrella term
that includes personalized passion projects,
service learning, job shadows, internships,
and sometimes even research.
Um, previously we participated with the main DOE
and a grant program for,
uh, extended learning opportunities.
And this is some of the data that we collected last year.
Myself and Tanya Ferrante were both facilitating ELOs
between the two of us.
We had 84 students last year, and we awarded 49
and a half elective credits.
Um, some of the data that we collected for the DOE included,
uh, paid students, students that were able
to get paid during their opportunities.
We were really fortunate there were two grant funded
programs, one
through JMG called the Main Career Exploration Badge,
where students earned $500 academic award when they did 40
hours of meaningful work experience.
And more than half of the students in our program
participated in a paid experience.
We also have another program with, uh,
the main Department of Education.
That's a partnership with Manpower,
where students can get paid minimum wage when they
participate in internships, which is great for students
who they don't have to choose between a paid work experience
and an extended learning opportunity.
And then finally, for disadvantaged youth, more than half
of our students are what the main DOE would categorize
as disadvantage, meaning
that they have an I-O-P-I-E-P-A 5 0 4, um,
language plan 'cause they're multilingual
or they identify as bipoc, which I think speaks to kind
of the inclusivity of our program here at the high school.
We also had 61 new community partners.
This is just in the ELO program, so not including any, um,
guest speakers within the school or for career fair.
So these are direct connections
that were newly made last year,
and for a total of 99 partnership engagements
between students and community members.
This year we made a couple of changes to our ELO program,
and I'll just go through quickly
in the next couple of slides.
One of them is we have Regional Group S.
This is when we work in partnership with other districts,
um, notably Scarborough, um,
Portland Schools and Cape Elizabeth.
And we sort of pool our resources so
that we don't burn out our community partners.
And it's also an opportunity
for our high school students here to be in programming
with students in other communities.
Uh, probably the most popular one is law.
We have five students this
semester participating in that program.
One of the new courses that we have is a
healthcare group, ELO.
We have partnered with Maine Health,
and our students are leaving every other week,
and we get on a bus
and we go to Maine Health in Scarborough.
They, they're participating in hands-on activities.
They're learning about different, um, fields
of healthcare careers.
Um, we also have them getting CPR training.
We have someone from the South Portland Fire Department,
a paramedic that's coming.
We've purchased some mannequins with grant funding so
that we're spending classroom time in their practicing CPR
in the classroom, A new program
that we're sort of piloting this year.
Last year, I had a student
who did an informational interview with a midwife,
and she came back and reported to the classroom that as, um,
you can get certified as a doula at the age of 16.
So I did a little bit of research
and found an organization in Massachusetts
that has a program where they facilitate
trainings for high school students.
Wrote a grant and we got grant funding.
So we're piloting this this year.
Um, they're coming and doing three day long
courses with students.
At the end of it, they have the option of getting certified,
um, through an online course
afterwards at no additional cost.
We've done the first day of the training so far,
and I know Representative Angela was
also a part of this training.
I would say, I think it's one
of the best trainings I've ever sat in and participated in.
We also have a group ELO in business.
We have 12 students this semester.
They're all working on sort of a mini business plan, an idea
that they have, and we're partnering them
with mentors in the community.
And next month they'll be pitching their business ideas
during their final presentations.
Um, we have two options for individual ELOs.
One of them is there in an in-class portion.
That means they're in class with me working on sort
of work readiness skills.
And they do an ELO project at the end of the semester.
And then we have what we call fully independent ELOs.
Those are internships where students are required
to do 40 hours with a community partner.
Those can vary. I have a student right now
that's doing a social media internship
with a boutique hotel in Portland.
I have another one working with an electrician.
I have someone volunteering at Mercy Hospital.
So they're, they're various,
I think this semester we have about 15 students doing
independent ELOs.
And now I'm gonna turn it over to Destiny.
Um, just to introduce her quickly,
she was in my ELO class in the spring semester of last year.
She's in my ELO class again this fall semester.
Um, this semester we had students, uh, do sort
of a skills assessment and pick skills if they wanted to try
and improve this semester.
And one of destiny's, which she wanted
to improve her public speaking.
So when this opportunity came,
I thought she'd be the perfect
candidate to talk about the program.
Hello everybody. I'm Destiny
and I took the ELL class last year,
and I'm taking it this year.
And so last year I decided
to make a project based on sports psychology.
Um, I'm an athlete and I do plan on playing in college.
I play basketball and usually the higher levels
of basketball, they have specified sports
psychologists for specific teams.
So I figured why not make something
for like high school students to be able to get
that experience as well.
Um, these are the four people that I ended up interviewing
for my final project.
Um, I have the Bates men's basketball head coach, the USM,
excuse me, sports psychologist, the Humane Girls,
basketball assistant coach,
and then the JMG regional director.
And she also coached Boden and Colby.
Um, I ended up coming up with a journal that I made.
So basically it goes through the days of the week.
I specified it to Monday, which is a reset and focus day.
And then it gives athletes reasons why it matters.
And then there's a check-in on like how they slept
on pre-practice and game breathing exercises,
and then a visual that they can envision for themselves
to become a better athlete.
For my fall semester plans, I decided to look into
physical therapy, art therapy,
cake decorating, and radiology.
Um, I know they're kind of all over the place,
But It's definitely things
that I'm interested in.
And I feel like this class will allow me
to explore them even more
and pick which one I'm most interested in.
And, um, I did decide I wanted to look mainly into radiology
along with cake decorating.
Yeah. Any questions?
Any questions for this lovely young woman here?
Or comments or otherwise? I have one. Oh, okay.
Uh, member Dowling.
Thank you so much for that great presentation.
And I was wondering, um,
is cake decorating something you've, you've dabbled in at,
at all, or are you, are you still sort of thinking about
Trying ready to order our cakes up here? So,
Um, I mean, I do it at like home.
I do like box cakes,
but I've tried, I've interviewed a cake decorator
and I might do it for my final project.
So it's still in the making.
Well, No pun intended, there,
Pursue it. My,
my mom did cake decorating when I was a little kid.
Uh, and just, she tried it just sort of on a whim
and ended up totally falling in love with it.
And now she has all these photo albums
of every cake she ever made, birthday cakes,
wedding cakes, all that kind of stuff.
And, uh, ended up being something she really enjoyed. Okay.
But Radiology's good too.
Thank you. Any other comments? Uh, member Richardson.
Um, I am so impressed at your checklist, your, uh,
sports psychology checklist.
I, as a student athlete, I
didn't know anything about taking deep breaths
or kind of having like a, a roadmap for clarity to, to,
to positive performance.
And I just am really impressed with that
and I hope you, I hope you use it.
Mm-hmm. And that it's helping. Um, I do have a question
for Justine about, um, so you're very careful
to talk about doe's Grant for 20 25, 4 to five,
what's going on with this year, if anything?
This year, the only grant funding we have is
for the youth doula initiative.
Everything else is just within the district itself.
Oh, I shouldn't say that. Actually.
There is still some remainder of, um, funding
through the DOE for the hourly paid internship.
So I do have some students this semester
that are getting paid hourly during their internships.
I don't foresee that continuing much
further than this year though,
So, yeah. Okay. So there's
no,
No. Yeah.
Alright. Thank you. Other questions? Comments?
The only thing I would say is that I was fortunate to come
to one of your presentations last spring.
It was, uh, incredibly informative.
I was really impressed with what these young, uh,
high school students did and what they presented.
And I hope that you will tell us the dates
of those presentations again, so that some
of us would be able to make it
'cause it, it was really great
and they clearly really love you.
So, uh, that was, that came through loud
and clear. Thank you. So thank
You. Yes. I'll definitely
let you know.
And if you ever wanna come into a class, I am,
I'm the door's open,
so please let me know or you have questions. I'm happy.
Okay. And we have a comment or question from
Member kbi? Yeah,
I have a question for Ms. Carlisle.
So like, last year
for some s you were working with Ms.
Ferranti. Mm-hmm. And this year, are you working
with anybody else or it's just, just you on your own? Nope,
Just me this year.
Okay.
Ms. McCloy, Ms. McCoy has left the district.
Oh, okay. Yeah,
She has. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you both very much. Yeah,
Thank you. Thank you.
So, last on, uh, my reports is the enrollment
enrollment report.
Um, it is back up, I think it's, um,
2000 for December 4th, 2000
729.
So we seem to be leveling out right about that, uh,
27 30, uh, mark in terms
of enrollment, oh, sorry.
Public comment now.
Yeah. No, I'm ready. I just know
this is now the time for the first audience of Citizens
and the school board welcomes public input.
All wishing to speak will be asked
to proceed to the microphone.
State your name and address for the record,
and each speaker has three minutes to comment.
Uh, please note that we'll be using the three minute timer
on the screen, and the superintendent will note when there's
30 seconds remaining.
Any questions asked specifically of the superintendent
or the board will be recorded by the superintendent
and responded to after all audience comments,
if information is not ready available, someone will get back
to you within a reasonable time.
So do we have anybody who would like to speak this evening?
Okay. Going once, going twice, seeing none,
we will continue to the, uh, audience of Citizens is closed
and we will continue to the report of committees.
So, uh, the first committee appointment, uh,
first committee report, I'm sorry, is the finance committee.
And, uh, that's member Holman.
Okay. Thank you. Um, so, uh, the finance committee has,
uh, um, received a real, very important report from, um,
our finance director, Abigail, um, kay.
And, uh, um, and, uh, we under,
and are we gonna be able to show that slide?
I wanna talk about it. So, um,
and I just need to open, hold on one thing.
Hold on. Okay. Here's my notes. Um, so Abba, um, yeah.
So, uh, um, so
what we've learned, yes, I have
It up there for you. Can you see it?
Oh, yep. That, yeah, I wanna see that's, yeah,
there's another one I wanna show too.
But anyway, um, so, so 30, so 30 38%
of our fiscal year funds have, have elapsed.
92 have been expended and or encumbered and encumbered.
If you don't know what encumbered means, encumbered means
that we can't spend it.
'cause we already know we are gonna
spend it such as salaries.
That's the key thing that would be encumbered.
Um, and, uh, um, one now that we, we've, now
that we've seen the completed contract from the teachers,
that has changed the scenario.
And, um, whereas last month we had a fairly rosy scenario.
This month we do not.
And, um, we are, uh, we, um, I wanna see the slide
where there's a different scenario.
There's a, if you could show it, please. Thank you. Okay.
And, um, uh,
and, uh, so, so what's gonna happen is that we, when,
when we look at all the expenses we have,
if we continue full steam ahead
and we don't reduce the amount we're spending, uh,
we would end up with a deficit, a maximum of 1.9 million.
It could be as little as 1.3 million.
So, um, and, uh, um,
that's not something I think any of us wanna see.
Um, and so, uh,
that's why we're gonna have a non-personnel spending freeze.
That, and what a spending freeze would mean is that anything
that is not related to safety
or direct instruction,
we would not wanna spend for the rest of the year.
So each, as, as, uh, many people would know,
schools have budgets that they can spend, the goal is
to try not to spend those budgets again.
If we were, if we go full steam ahead,
you can see scenario C.
Is that big enough? Can people see that? Yep. Okay.
That's what we would end up with.
Um, and
however, the great news is that we have other options.
So if you look at scenario A, we could actually end up
with almost a little bit around a half a million surplus.
And that would be the ideal goal. Now.
Um, so, so, so that we, we would, um, that would be,
we really tighten our belts.
We, we stick to the non-personnel spending. That's painful.
But, um, uh, uh, we hope that we, we have reason to believe
that our substitute costs are gonna be
a little bit less than they were.
And, um, we're gonna try
and reduce our nutrition fund deficit.
That's one of the things that we've learned from this, is
that we need to look at how we budget for nutrition.
Because if we keep having deficits,
that means there's something wrong with
how we've been budgeting it going forward.
And, um, uh, um, Abigail Ketin,
our director, has been amazing in terms of going over
with great detail and really work out all these
different scenarios for us.
And I'm very pleased about that
and very thankful for the, the detailed work
and how she's really trying to right this ship.
If you've been following South Portland, uh, finances
for a while, you know that we've gone through a slew
of directors and we are very fortunate
to have someone who's willing to stick with us
and get through the hard part.
And I, I'm very thankful for that.
Um, scenario B would, we'd be looking at, uh,
possibly a half a million plus deficit.
And, um, that is just a little slightly different scenario.
Note that however it, that, that we could,
we maybe we come down with a zero de,
like zero surplus, zero deficit.
So it's not like there's any wiggle room, but it does.
And, and, and the other thing
to remember is we're not talking about
a very long period of time.
It can be painful when you have to cut back,
but we're not talking about forever.
We're talking about getting through
the rest of this school year.
So this is gonna take, um, this is gonna be uncomfortable.
Uh, I know the people, you know,
like I'm looking at the school principals are all looking
like, no, you guys are kidding me.
No, we, we don't want to do that. Of course no one does.
No one ever wants to, I hate tightening my belt when it
comes to spending, and I think most people do.
Um, but, um, but I'm hoping that we can pull together
and do our best with that.
Um, and, uh, let's see, uh, um,
uh, George, any other comments?
So, uh, I would defer, if there are questions
that p board members have, uh, I would defer those
to superintendent and whistle and, uh,
and he can make determinations about
who else might need to speak to them.
Are there questions? Uh, member Richardson.
Um, I have a couple questions.
Um, I have just a general observation that, um,
I'd like, I think we, the board deserves an explanation, um,
regarding our, uh, kind of assurances that the
contract, um, increases that we had budgeted for,
um, with the various contracts
that we negotiated were built into the budget.
Um, and so I'm, I'm a little confused and
and perplexed as to, as to how we're here.
And I hope that there's some kind of an explanation.
We also just signed the ed tech contract this evening,
and what are we looking at for,
for the, uh, sort of impact of
that once those numbers get, get put in?
Um, I'm not a fan of a, of the, of touching the nutrition
fund, uh, deficit.
Uh, I, I think from what I understand, that entire kind of,
um, budget requires
a pretty extensive analysis.
Um, but I mean,
I think scenario A is likely an impossible scenario
from, from my perspective.
So, um, you know, I, um,
I want, I I, I just want, I want the board to, to,
to be mindful of what, of what those scenarios are, are kind
of introducing.
Um, but,
but again, I'm really curious about kind of why we're here
and, and, and how we got here.
Thank you. I'm gonna defer that
to superintendent Aunt Whistle.
May I just make a comment? Yes.
Thank you. Um, just, so just keeping in mind though,
that the, that scenario A does allow us a wiggle room
and there's half a million dollars in there
to, that could get us to zero.
So just saying that.
So I think those are, I think those are good questions,
and I think that, um, Abigail, uh, Ketchu is available
and able to address, um, both of those questions.
So, Ms. Ketchum, would you like
to come to the podium, please?
And you can start with answering, uh,
member Richardson's questions.
Thank you.
Yeah. All right. Good evening everyone.
Uh, thank you for this opportunity
to share another finance update.
Um, I do wanna start with explaining, um, you know,
that why we are seeing a different picture than last month,
Abigail, I think that it's, um, we're getting,
we're having a hard time hearing a little bit.
Is that mic on? I, it has.
The mic is on, but you need to speak right into it, right?
Yeah, sorry. Alright,
Thank you. Um,
good, good evening everyone. There we go.
Um, thank you for this opportunity to share, you know,
another finance update.
Um, I do wanna start
with just explaining why we're seeing a different picture
than the prior month's projection.
Um, the prior projection, um,
did not include the full increases
for the newly ratified teachers contract.
Um, we did include a retro pay estimate in there.
Um, but the remaining years worth of estimate increases, um,
didn't show up into our prior projections calculations.
Um, why it doesn't match our original,
like why the whole budget doesn't seem to support, um,
the personnel that we have.
I think we have more research to do, um, to really get
to the bottom of that, um, more analysis.
Certainly. Um, we do believe
that our current updated figures are more accurate, um,
if anything, just because they include the updated payroll,
um, with the new contract.
Um, so there's no, there's, the calculation for
that piece doesn't need to be there.
We just have the updated figures.
Um, it's of course worth noting that, we'll,
that we will have another update next month.
Um, we have the new contract that we've just, um, settled,
um, which is fantastic.
And, uh, we may not have all the, the extras
that could be in that contract.
Um, so I would want the opportunity to add those in, build
that in, and we'll have, you know, probably
yet another slightly different picture next month.
Um, with all that said, you know,
as we reflect on projections, any projection is,
is like one point along a spectrum of possibilities.
And so that's why we've moved towards looking at really
scenario building type of work so that we can make decisions
so that we can have some if then kind of conversations
and that's where we are landing on, um, as strong
and non-personal spending phrase as possible.
Um, I wanna open up to other questions
or if there's any question that I didn't get to.
Are there other questions from board members for, uh,
um, member Smith, please?
Yeah, so we were shared that, um, kind
of more detailed line item document.
Is that available for us to look at here?
I have like specific questions about line items.
Mm-hmm. Just
because my, my main question here is the difference
between the three scenarios involves, you know,
a large percentage of money coming from special education
and nutrition, and I just wanna get a sense of what those,
what, what that spending is, what that cons
spending considered discretionary might look like on a kind
of, it doesn't have to be on a granular level,
but like what exactly the difference
between these three scenarios is.
Yeah, I can explain them a little bit if
that's helpful. Go ahead. That'd be great.
Okay. Are you, are we able to pull up the Yeah,
That is that document available as the slide?
That's the report that I, We don't have that.
It's, it's not, that document hasn't been prepared
to be, uh, projected.
It would just be too small.
Okay. Yeah. Um,
what's up there on the slide though is a
pretty succinct version of it.
Yeah. Um, okay.
Um, so first of all, again, scenarios show possibilities.
It doesn't mean it will definitely land like that.
And I think the two extremes are not
what will really happen.
It may likely be somewhere in the middle.
Um, um, all three projections.
They include features that can and will definitely change.
Um, and some tho some of those things are beyond our direct
and current control.
Um, there could be changes month to month as well as sort
of suddenly indiscreet moments.
Uh, for example, in all three scenarios,
I have us removing the full revenue that we expected
to budget from our fund balance.
I should have a better update in a week
or so, in which case that will affect the bottom line.
Um, we have electricity costs,
which are budgeted all at once for all buildings
after the fiscal year closes.
So we've got estimates built in,
but that's another example of, you know,
we can have surprises, um, as, as we move along.
And that's why we're trying to encumber all we can
and get every estimate in that we can, um, just
to help buffer ourselves.
Um, and then anything that's unanticipated, obviously
that's not in the projections.
Um, in scenario A is a what if scenario,
and that what if is if every director, every principal's,
um, non-personnel budgets that they have, that's
for supplies, for services, for maintenance,
repairs and the like.
Um, if they were to completely halt spending
and maybe 10% eed through
because we needed to spend that for safety
or direct instruction as of mid-November, that's
where we would land.
Um, that also includes us, you know,
seeing the nutrition deficit change.
Um, and then we've also built in a, you know,
what if we also got another a hundred K in revenue, um,
which isn't so impossible.
Last, um, while, while we had a, a while,
we had a big deficit in spending,
we in the last fiscal year, FY 25, you know, we overspent,
but we also had more revenue than expected.
Um, so there is some rationale for that.
And then in scenario B,
it's basically if we have a non-personal spending freeze,
um, but it is not as effective
and more, um, spending comes through, um,
in which case there, uh, we could land somewhere
around half a million dollar deficit.
Um, I think what's different this time around than last time
around is that this time we can't think about having a fun
balance to cover this.
Mm-hmm. Um, and in fact that 1.9 looks, you know,
like a really large deficit,
but it's kind of similar to where we were in FY 25.
So it's kind of like we're back at the level of deficit
that we started.
Um, questions.
Mm-hmm. Are there other questions for, uh, an, um,
member Davidson?
Uh, hi Ms. Cason. Mm-hmm.
Um, I was wondering, in order to reduce the deficit
of the nutrition fund mm-hmm.
What positions need to be cut?
And then my second question is,
if US student leaders could maybe do a food drive to,
to support the cafeteria, maybe to reduce
that deficit in other ways.
I mean, I think the nutrition fund needs more analysis
and review and discussion.
They have a brand new nutrition director who's just getting
her feet and just starting the job.
Um, so I think we have,
we just have more review to do there.
We're not cutting food or positions there at this time.
Um, and we're certainly not cutting food. Okay.
Thank you. I have questions from other members, uh,
felt member feller, just a
Comment. Thanks so much for
your work
and a lot of people have been singing your
praises, uh, in my ears. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank You. Thank you. Uh, member, uh, Holman, um,
I, uh, I wonder, I, I'm interested in, um,
our student representatives idea about,
of the student leaders helping out.
I, I would like to know where does student go?
Um, this may not, this is not necessarily to you,
but I think it'd be really great
to give some direction around that.
If students have the energy to do something like that,
it'd be great to, great to harness that energy.
And, um, how do students do something like that?
I don't know. I don't know who answers that question.
Nobody, uh, it's a rhetorical question.
I mean, we don't have an answer to that.
What I mean is there is not an answer before us tonight.
So that's not an answer for, no, not for Abigail.
That's not a question for, for, for, um, Abigail, uh, Ms.
Ms. Ketchum. And, uh, so are there other questions?
Uh, member Richardson?
Uh, I think this is more of a question for George.
Um, but I'm wondering about the,
uh, appropriateness of
engaging with school PTAs for help
with the personnel, the non spending personnel freeze.
So, uh, to superintendent and whistle.
I, I'm sorry, I'm not understanding
Your question. So if
I, I, I guess my que I guess,
I guess maybe I have a question.
What does the personnel freeze actually look like?
What does that look like in our schools?
It's not a personnel freeze. This is, this is all
All, sorry, non personnel spending freeze.
Right. So, so what, what, like, what is that,
what's an example of something that
It's the more, the discretionary accounts that are outside
of anything related to personnel
To do what with, what would you use those funds for?
They would be spent on supplies and, and other services.
But we are saying that the, the, uh, curtailment needs
to be of those rather than anything having
to do with personnel.
So that's just the distinction in terms of the freeze,
I'm still, I'm sorry, I'm still not really understanding
what, you know, what, what I under like, you know,
like are we talking about like toilet paper
Or, um, I, let me, let me ask.
Yeah. Um, Abigail Okay. Knows what's in all of those lines.
Yeah. So I'll let her answer. Thank
You. Sure. Um,
so at the school level,
non-personal spending would include, um, books, classrooms,
supplies, um, association dues, memberships, um,
all the things you need, um, that,
that you can feel in in the school, cleaning, you know,
cleaning a rug, um, a roll of laminating paper, all
Of that, right. And
that, and that's that.
And like, so I guess my question is, if as a parent,
if I heard that a certain book couldn't be purchased
for a classroom, I would wanna help.
So we have PTAs that theoretically
could support those needs.
So can we, you know, my question was, you know, is
that an appropriate engagement of PTAs?
And, and if so, how do we kind of make that,
how do we, how do we alert them of this freeze?
That question would go to
superintendent and whistle. Yeah.
I, I think that, I think that we would first need to,
to understand what the impact is.
Um, each of these, uh,
principles will be making different decisions about
what they can go without based on what they already have
as supplies, what, what they've already ordered,
what they've received, and, and all of that.
And I think that the
communication would be best coming directly from the
schools, uh, to the PTAs.
Um, if it should involve, you know, things that perhaps, uh,
the PTA might, um, be able to provide to, uh, to,
to support us, um, uh,
through whatever the, those needs
are. That, that makes sense.
Yeah. So I'm hearing it's possible is
what I'm hearing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
I I, I, I don't see why not. Okay.
Thank you. Other questions?
The same question as, uh, board member Richardson. Okay.
Thank you. Any other questions? Uh, member, uh, Smith.
So am I correct in hearing that most
of the decision making power is gonna be at the school level
with principals on kind of a day-to-day basis?
Not just the principals, but all
of the directors that we have.
Okay. They, they all are managing significant budgets and,
and ev everyone is part of this curtailment.
Yeah. And I, I didn't, this is not a question
to be answered now, but I think going forward in the next
few months, maybe getting a sense from particular, you know,
departments of, you know, how realistic
a 50% versus 90% cut looks like, you know,
and just getting a real sense of what
that difference has an effect on students on a day-to-day
level on teachers in their classrooms.
And, um,
and just be good going forward to,
to maybe get a couple of those reports.
I think our plan is to continue to update the public, um,
every time we have a board meeting.
Thank you. Uh, other questions? Uh, member Rich,
I'm kind of new to all this, um,
but when I see the word deficit, is there some kind
of target or some kind of operating principle behind that?
Like, we wanna stay below certain percentages or something,
or could you share something? Thank you.
Yeah, we must land in the black this year
because we've expended our, any savings that we have.
Okay. We, we cannot be at a deficit if a few months goes by.
We're, we're having harder conversations.
I understand. Thank you. Mm-hmm.
Other questions, comments? Uh, member Davidson.
Sorry. It's all right.
Um, I'm not sure who to address this question to,
but I'm gonna put it out there.
I was wondering what we students can do
to help our school access adequate resources,
especially if we're considering, um, tighter budgets.
Uh, I was wondering maybe could we do a book drive,
a supply drive in addition to the food drive?
Um, and I think that if it's student led, it could reach,
uh, more audiences.
And I was just wondering what we can do to be involved.
And maybe this is a question for Ms. Glenn too,
if you wanna follow up later.
Okay. Perfect.
Yeah, the, uh,
superintendent Aunt Whistle, did you wanna say anything too?
Yeah, I just, I love the, I love the energy and the,
and the thinking that's happening.
I, I think it's just a little bit soon in the process,
but I think if there are needs that emerge in any
of the schools that, um, that the principals and, and
or in any of the, uh, the other areas,
the directors will be advising us of, of
what those needs might be. So thank you Alex.
Thank you. Other questions? Comments?
I just have one more,
I'm sorry. Thank you. Go
ahead. Just
A clarification that we are, we have communicated
that there is a non personnel spending
freeze that is in effect.
Yes. Okay. So there, yes. And
An email has gone out to all staff earlier today,
and we've already discussed this
with the principals and directors.
Okay. Thank you. And just so board members are aware, uh,
superintendent Aunt Whistle
and I spoke today, that email will also be sent
to board members, so you'll know exactly
what was communicated with staff.
Uh, any other questions for, uh, Ms. Ketchum?
I would just make a comment on
data, you know, maybe we could share. You
Wanna speak George? Oh, I'm
sorry. Are there any
other questions or comments?
Okay. Board member Rich,
I'm new here.
Uh, doing fine. Just for, you know, data transparency.
Maybe we could show some people who are interested,
you know, this is how much the budget is for this or that.
'cause we could do sort of a material goods drive,
but that doesn't help with personnel costs
or capital expenditures and that sort of thing.
It might be useful. Full.
Thank you. Other comments or questions?
Seeing none. Thank you. Uh, Ms. Ketchum. Thanks.
Having, I appreciate that. Thank you.
Uh, the next is the report of the policy committee.
Um, and, uh, that's me.
So it's going to be not nearly as, uh, as, uh,
problematic as the finance committee,
but at the last policy meeting.
Um, we had three policies, well,
four policies that we were looking at.
Uh, one is the policy for the agenda, which, um,
is being drafted by Member Richardson, policy
for public Comment, which is being drafted by me.
And, uh, those are going to be dealt
with at our January meeting as well.
And we have the policy for the code of ethics,
which I'm going to turn over
to Member Dowling here in one moment.
Um, and we also have the policy for temperature control.
And, uh, I and I will have, uh,
member Dowling speak to that as well.
Um, so, uh, let me do that first
before I make my last comment.
Go ahead.
Okay. So the, the School Board Member ethics policy, uh,
was something that I first noticed about a, a year ago.
And what made it kind of stand out to me was
that it was written in a very unusual way
that didn't match the rest of the policy manual.
Uh, rather than sort of specifying what members are to do
or not do, uh, it's, it's written a bit like an oath.
It says, I will do this and such and such,
and I will not do that.
So my first thought was just how to, um, rewrite
that in a way that makes it, uh,
read like a policy and not like an oath.
Uh, so that was the bulk of what, uh, what I suggested
for edits on that policy.
Uh, and there was one other line in the policy where it's,
uh, sort of telling board members
what opinion they should have about things.
And to me, that strikes me as
not necessarily an ethics issue.
And also, we, we can't
and shouldn't control what opinions people have.
So I suggested striking, uh, that first, uh, line.
Uh, but everything else was just, um, getting rid
of the I statements, um, getting rid of some redundancies,
uh, so that it doesn't say, um, you know, at all times,
three or four or five times throughout the policy.
You can just say at all times at the top,
and people will know from there.
Uh, so yeah, that was, that was what I offered
for suggestions at the policy committee
and, um, the other members seemed to like it,
So. And
so, we will have the first read on that,
and we will have the second read on the, um, policy, uh,
J-G-D-J-I-I, no, I, I-G-D-J-I,
these letters make me crazy,
but on co-curricular activities.
And, um, member Dowling,
did you wanna give the update on the temperature control,
uh, policy and what's going to happen with that?
Sure. Um, the policy committee decided it would make sense
to have the Buildings
and Grounds Committee work on the, uh, temperature policy,
since it's the facility staff who will be charged with
carrying out whatever that policy is.
We wanted to make sure that they had, uh, a good amount of,
uh, input since they know our systems, our infrastructure.
Um, we have a lot of variance in HVAC capabilities
among our different schools.
There are some schools like the middle school
that has a very modern and complete system.
Uh, and there are other schools that have, uh,
oil fired steam heat and, uh, and no air conditioning.
So, uh, it'll take some, some balancing to try
to create a policy that will work in
all of our different schools.
Uh, but we did work on that at the last Buildings
and Grounds Committee meeting.
Uh, we are starting from a model policy that was, um,
shared with us from Main School Management Association.
Uh, we also looked at a couple of policies
that neighboring districts have already adopted.
Um, and we will most likely have a draft ready to send back
to the policy committee, uh, in January, I believe.
Yes.
Uh, our next meeting of policy is January 5th.
Um, the, the last two things I will say is I've been going
through the policy handbook,
and there are a lot of policies that are outdated
that are not really pertinent to what we do, uh,
in our schools now.
So those will come forth, uh, to the,
to the committee as well.
And the last thing I wanted to say is I wanted to welcome,
uh, our new member, Jimenez Gild o Paolo,
to the Policy Committee.
And I think, uh, Mr.
Paolo's going to be really critical in two ways.
One, uh, helping us look at our policies
through another lens.
Uh, the rest of us sitting
around the table all look the same and sound the same.
And, um,
and it's often difficult to reflect on a policy,
uh, and say, how does this really, how,
how does this really affect either our employees
or our students?
So, um, I will be asking, uh, Mr.
Paolo also to help us develop a policy on equity
and looking at professional development for the board
to consider, because I think that that's a really key
policy, um, that affects
how we, how we operate in our schools.
I was listening to, um,
a program on point today on NPR
and the presenter who I could not see, um,
but was talking about that, you know, equity's sort of done,
you know, that's over with.
And, um, I was so, uh, hysterical as I was listening
to the presentation that I called up immediately
to leave a message, you know, to say,
I can't see your presenter,
but my guess is that he looks like me.
And, um, and I think that it's really easy for us
to look at issues around equity
and say that's, that's all done.
Um, because we come from places of privilege.
And, uh, I spoke about that on Monday, um,
when I spoke with regard to where,
where we are in what's important in schools.
So I think that, um, Mr.
Paulo will give us great insight,
and I really look forward to his work on the committee
with us and helping us look at professional development
and look more at equity,
because I think it is the underpinning of
where we are in education and what we have to do.
Um, it's not moving kids around to make, to,
to make things look even,
but it's about how do we actually teach kids,
and what's our skillset in doing that?
So, um, I look forward to Mr.
Paulo's work with us on there on that. Thank you.
Um, so next we will go to the Report of Buildings
and Grounds, and that's back to Mr.
Dowling.
And, and what I said
before about the temperature policy,
that was my buildings and grounds report.
So, um, I'll just add that this is a very busy time of year
for our custodial staff with, um, a lot of salt
and sand being tracked into our schools.
And I know they're working really hard to, uh,
keep the schools clean
and safe, uh, make sure everyone is, uh, you know,
got a good amount of friction on the
walkways when they're coming in.
So kudos to them for always doing a great job with that.
Thank you. And we will now go to the, I
Have a question about Yes.
Um, for Member Dowling.
Did, um, did the meeting
regarding the middle school field come up at all?
Do we know the outcome of that from, um, from,
was that, did that come up or at all?
Or, the, the last report we heard there was this kind
of crucial meeting between
the contractor and
I, I'll refer that question to the superintendent.
So I'm, I'm sorry.
So the question is about, uh, the giving an update on
where we are with the athletic field
at the middle school, right.
And the la at the last meeting, um, Mr.
Na, Natalie was going to have a meeting
and, um, get some feedback about who was going
to be responsible and what was going to happen with the
Field. Yes, the, the,
that meeting has happened,
and there's also been some other work
that's needed to happen after that.
So we will have another new update,
and we can do that certainly before or, um,
or at the next meeting, next board meeting.
Thank you. Yep. Thank you.
Um, yes, uh,
member Holman. Thank
You. Um,
uh,
because I did see, this is actually on the same topic that,
um, uh, Elaine Richardson just mentioned, um,
because we do have this attached in the, in the agenda is
that in, in the meeting minutes from November for the, uh,
building Grounds committee, there is the report from Activ
tasks on the fields.
So the question is, what is, yeah, what is happening?
Where are we up to with that?
We just, so we have the activity task report that says
that we need overseeing and we need some additional, they,
they, they describe some steps
because for the public's, you know, information,
we are four years into a new middle school
and still an unusable athletic field.
And I think we all have gotten, it's finally
for myself, I'm like, wait a minute.
And I think most of us feel like, wait a minute.
So I, I don't know.
Is there, um, um,
Adrian Delling, is there anything else about
That? The question will go
to the superintendent.
I, I think it's, uh, again, it's the, it's the same.
There has been a meeting, it's just actually happened within
the last couple of days.
Uh, and I think that we would have a, a better report
next month, or if there's something
that we can share before that.
Okay. Um, we'll do that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, and we are onto the consent agenda. I have a question.
Oh, I'm sorry. Another question. I just have
A general question for the chair board.
You have a sense of, um, when we're gonna, a sense
of the process for deciding new members joining committees?
Thank you for asking that, that,
that is on our February agenda,
but I'm gonna be talking with people before that,
but I want to do that publicly.
So, um, I will talk with you the, the,
there are three standing committees, um,
and I took some notes about that today.
But there are three standing committees,
which are the policy committee, the, um, buildings
and grounds, and the finance committee.
Those are the three standing committees.
And there are ad hoc committees.
There's the committee with on ai, um, there's a committee,
uh, potentially a committee on curriculum.
Um, so I, I need to, I'm meeting tomorrow morning
with the superintendent, and that's one
of the things for me to talk about.
Okay. Okay. Thank you.
Um, okay.
Superintendent ant whistle to the consent agenda.
Yeah, there's, there are a number of items,
but they do need to be read.
So here we go. 7.1, approval
of the minutes from the regular meeting held
November 3rd, 2025, 7.2, approval
of the minutes from the board.
WOR workshop held on November 5th, 2025,
7.3, approval of the minutes from the inauguration,
held on December 1st, 2025, approval of the minutes.
Uh, 7.4, approval
of the minutes from the special meeting held on
December 3rd, 2025, uh, 7.5, uh, approval
of the donations and grants as follows,
$7,000 from the Bridge to Work Foundation via
Maine Community Foundation to pay for expenses
for 13 students to enroll in South Portland.
Adult education's Bridge to Hospitality careers program,
$700 From Adopt a Classroom
to the ESOL team at Skill
and Elementary to support programming
and activities for multilingual learners.
$1,500 from donors choose to
purchase a digital microscope at the skill
in elementary library.
$792 from Hannaford helps schools
to support the snack pantry and clothing closet at Skilling.
Skilling Elementary.
$945 from Hannaford helps schools
to support classroom resources, student programs,
and other needs that enhance learning
and wellbeing at small school.
$5,000 from the Howard p Calhoun Family Foundation
to the South Portland High School Outing Club
to support events, trainings,
and purchasing equipment for outdoor activities.
$531 from Hannaford helps schools
to support students at Kaler Elementary School.
$729 from Hannaford helps schools
to support Brown Elementary School Activity Fund.
$314 from donors.
Choose to support a project posted by, uh,
south Portland Middle School teacher, um, Melinda Nud,
uh, sixth grade humanities,
$1,389 from donors.
Choose to support a project posted
by South Portland Middle School teacher Peter Wetzel.
Computer Science. $3,769 from Hannaford
helps schools to support South Portland Middle School,
1000 from the $1,000 from the Music Drives US Foundation
in partnership with Maine Public
to the South Portland Middle School Instrumental music
program to purchase new instruments, $1,200
as a grant submitted by, uh,
5, 5 6, uh,
PE teacher Sam Lenon from Special Educations
of Special Education Olympics of Maine to,
uh, support and, uh, build this program.
$20,000 from Catholic Charities, Maine Office
of Refugee Services to pay for activities related
to English learning, English language instruction,
and learning for adult, uh, individual adults who qualify.
$780 from Hannaford helps schools programed
to support Dyer Elementary.
And lastly, $934 and 10 cents.
Uh, commission from Shutterfly, Lifetouch, LLC
to support Dyer Elementary.
Uh, you have just listened to a grand total of,
of $46,583
and 10 cents of donations. Mm.
So before we take a motion to accept the consent agenda,
uh, are there any items that any board member would like
to remove from the consent agenda to deal with separately?
If there are none, I will accept a motion
to accept the consent agenda as written as read.
So moved. Moved by Holman,
and seconded by, uh, feller,
uh, member Holman.
You, you were the maker of the motion. So you speak first.
You can say, I have nothing to say. I have nothing to say.
I mean, okay. Uh, and to the second
I celebrate these donations.
Thank you. Any other comments? Um, member Richardson.
Um, I have a question about, um,
is it appropriate to ask a question?
It's just a clarifying question. I have no problem.
Obviously, I have no problem with these donations.
Some of, some of the, um, donations, you know,
are very specific in terms of what they're going to support.
And then some are just going to a school.
Does the school, and I think this is really for George,
does the school have any, who decides
where those funds go and what those funds can be used for?
Good question to superintendent and Whistle.
Um, I think that would be, uh, decided.
If it's, it's just to the school, then
that would be a principal's decision.
Any other questions, comments?
It's likely that they got the donation
because there was Right.
Something that they had, were needing.
Okay. Thank you. Anyone else? Any other comments?
Uh, member Davidson.
I just wanted to remark and say $46,000.
That's what our community can do if we reach
out and ask for help.
So, mm-hmm.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Seeing none. All those in favor to approve the consent, uh,
agenda as read.
And that's unanimous.
So, new business, we have consideration
and action to approve the Southport High School overnight
field trip for the 11th
and 12th grade students
to attend the A CDA Eastern Region Honor Choir Festival in
Providence, Rhode Island from 2 25 26 to 2 28 26.
Could I have a motion to approve?
Move by feller
and seconded by Holman,
uh, member feller.
Nothing to add. Nothing to add. Member Holman. Oh, voyage.
Okay. Anybody have any other comments? Seeing none.
All those in favor? And that's unanimous.
Uh, next is consideration
and action to approve policy IGDJ
co-curricular activities.
And I have a motion to approve.
Moved by feller and seconded. By seconded.
Uh, seconded by Smith. Uh, any comments?
Member Fowler. Nothing to add? Okay. All those in favor?
And that's unanimous.
Consideration and action To accept
as a first reading policy, BCA School Board member ethics.
Could I have a motion to approve?
Move by Dowling
and seconded by
Holman, uh, Dowling?
No. Member Dowling. Any any comments? None. Okay. None.
And hol. Okay. Thank you.
Uh, seeing no comments from anybody else? Seeing none.
All those in favor proving the motion.
And that is also unanimous.
We are at the second audience of the citizens.
Before I bother
and read that, is there anybody who's, uh,
interested in speaking?
Okay. She is good. Then I get to read it. Great.
Um, so the school board welcomes public input.
All wishing to speak will be asked
to proceed to the microphone.
State your name and address,
and each speaker has three minutes to comment.
Please note, we're using the timer up on that screen,
which isn't up there right now,
but it's going to be in, it's going
to be in one second, in in one second.
Um, and it will be visible on the screen.
The superintendent will give you notice when there's
30 seconds remaining.
Any questions asked of the superintendent
of the board will be recorded by the superintendent
and responded to
after all audience comments,
if information is not readily available,
someone will get back to you within a reasonable time.
So please introduce yourself and you can speak.
Good evening. My name is Melinda Hut.
I live at 44 Kayla Road,
and I have a daughter who is at Brown Elementary
and a niece who is at Small Elementary.
Um, I just wanted to extend a welcome
to the newest school board members, um,
and a welcome back, um, for those who have served, um,
and for the last several years.
Um, you may recognize me, um,
from previous school board meetings.
And so, um, I'm here again, uh, just, uh,
to comment a little bit on the, um, budget situation.
And so I, I have some general questions on the, um, the list
of donations that were read.
Uh, just, uh, just some curiosities about each.
Um, are each of the donations pursued
and procured, um, by each individual, um,
recipient or school?
Or is there, uh, a coordinated strategy
or effort looking not only at what maybe individual desires
and requests might be, um,
but also at broader needs across the system in terms of
donations, um, and sponsorships and things like that.
And on that note, um, I have another question about, um,
the foundation that, um, uh, in past months
and years, um, parents have stood up
and, um, requested, um, that we move forward as a community,
um, in putting together, um, a viable
and sustainable, um, foundation operation.
So I hope that this board, um, is really interested in kind
of fast tracking that.
Um, and the third thing that I will reiterate is
that you have a group of, um, talented
and committed parents who have resources.
Um, uh, we have consistently shown up, um, in various ways
with the community that's been alluded to before.
Um, and we've shown up here at these meetings, um,
on several occasions to offer our talent, our money,
our resources, our connections, and our energy.
And I'm really hoping
that this board will take advantage of that.
Um, we are sincere, we are earnest.
Um, we want to work with you.
We are smart, we are caring,
and we deeply appreciate everything that you, um,
uh, strive to pursue
and the potential of us doing it
together. So thank you.
Thank you. And the questions will be answered
after the, uh, end of the public comment.
Where's our timer?
It's not functioning. Oh, okay. That's why Timeless
The one out there. You not.
Can we, Andy, we can just do a, something on the phone.
You just hit your own start
Button. Can I use my,
Well done. Buckle up everybody.
Um, alright. I'm going to put my three minutes on the clock.
Hi, everybody. Um, that's not working. Trust me.
I'm gonna be quick. I promise. It's like this much text.
Um, hi, my name is Sarah Gay.
I am a parent
of three South Portland Middle School students.
I am married to a South Portland high school class
of 1998 alum.
Um, I live just behind Reds.
Yes, I have strong feelings. Please ask.
Um, and I am honored
to be in my 17th year teaching in South Portland
and my second year as president
of the South Portland Teachers Association.
And it is on behalf of that organization that I would like
to welcome, uh, members reach Smith
and Feller, congratulations
to Member Richardson on winning your election.
Congratulations, vice Chair Dowling
and Chair D'Angelos on your appointments.
And Claire, we're just so psyched you're here. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, uh, member Smith, thank you
for surfacing the question about teacher feedback on the
ground level impact of a non personnel spending freeze.
We are very eager to share, um,
and we are extremely grateful as an organization
to have been invited to a conversation about
budget strategy this week.
Uh, big picture. We're also eager
to learn more about the trajectory
of our superintendent search on Wednesday, um,
and hope that everyone is prepared
for some robust engagement.
We have members with a lot to say and, um,
and some really amazing perspectives on our students
and the work that we do every day.
Um, a couple of questions that I know I am going
to get several of which I have already received
during the course of this meeting.
Um, is the proposal to cut, substitute, uh,
budgeting, um, cutting the opportunity
to hire substitutes externally?
Or is that a reduction in the cost that is allocated
for any substitute coverage, including internal,
where staff members are subbing for their colleagues?
Um, and in either case, we'd like
to hear more about the district's plan
for mitigating the impact, um, on instructional time
for both students and planning time for educators, um,
as we have reduced opportunities to higher qualified subs.
Um, another question.
Um, we've heard reference to a $3.6 million deficit
and are wondering if
that figure in calculation from
this is now many months back.
I'm pretty sure this is what Abigail was referencing.
In the month to month, things are changing and evolving.
This was a number from Help me out which month.
It was like several meetings back.
I'd have to go back and check.
There's some question about an outstanding deficit if
you would just, I'll get it back to
You. Speak this way
and, sorry. Um, and we'll, we'll
Get the questions answered. Yeah,
we'll, I'll get you, uh, a date on that.
Um, but it was one of the, one
of our members reached out already to ask if that was part
of the calculations for this year.
Um, and we also had a member reach out to ask already, uh,
how changes to nutrition expenses might impact students
and how and when
that information may be shared with families.
That's all I've got. Thank you all so much for being here.
Have a good night.
Thank you. Is there anybody else?
Uh, seeing none public audience is closed,
but I will go to the superintendent
for the questions that were asked.
Um, yes.
Uh, the member of the public
who made all those generous offers,
I think it sounds wonderful.
Uh, the donations are not necessarily organized in a,
we don't have one person identified who is out there working
with, uh, groups, uh, to, um, to solicit
and coordinate and organize.
I think the principals work together.
Um, and, and often, uh, we'll, we'll coordinate, uh,
certain opportunities together.
But I, I think, uh, there's nothing formal.
Uh, but as you can see, we, we do still continue to get, um,
a, a good fair share of, um, of donations.
More is always better in that instance.
Um, in terms of the foundation, um, there's a couple
of us here, uh, sitting in here.
Uh, I, I see, um, uh, Rebecca from the middle school and I,
and me, and I'm not sure who else, uh, we are,
have been working on the Education foundation
and moving, uh, that forward.
Um, our, ours is the, uh, um, the responsibility
to, uh, uh, plan a foundation.
So we are not actually creating the foundation right now,
but we are, are laying out a plan for that foundation.
Um, and the group that is doing
that planning is leaning very heavily on a community school
model and really supporting a community school model.
Um, it's very exciting, um, and, uh, has great potential
and there's a lot of energy around that.
Um, in terms of, uh, active, uh, parents offering talent,
money and all of those other things, I would say yes, yes
and yes on all of those.
Um, we, uh,
this is a very giving community and, um,
and I think that that was just for the demonstration
of the kind of engagement
that people really want to have with the school.
And, um, from the school perspective, we are very welcoming
and very appreciative of that,
Uh, superintendent whistle that there was a question from,
uh, uh, Ms. Gay about substitute
the cost cuts for substitute teachers.
Can you speak to that? Yeah, I, I don't, I don't know that
that is part Oh, yes, Joe, thanks,
Uh, Johanna Prince, assistant superintendent.
And, uh, to address
that question about substitute adjustment
that is not related to, uh,
in-house substitute comp compensation, it is the fact that
as of right now, we know of fewer, uh, pregnancies
and family leave that are planned than we had last year.
Of course, that there may be exciting news
for families on the horizon, uh, and that may change,
or someone may have a medical event.
But just in terms of where we're at for
our projections, that's a piece of it.
Thank you. Yep. Uh,
and the other question, which I,
I think we don't have an answer to,
but you can tell me, superintendent ENT whistle was the,
the $3.6 million deficit.
Is that part of the current calculations? No,
I, I think I, I I think it's been a, a moving number.
That's what I thought. Yeah. Things have been getting
cleaner and clearer.
We have audit results, um, you know, more
and more confidence in the numbers that we're getting.
And, and I think what we're presenting right now are, is
that, uh, sort of option A, option B, option C, uh,
one more conservative than the next.
Um, and I, I think we'll probably continue to,
uh, project in that way.
Uh, and those numbers too, may, may tighten up.
I'm hoping they mi might tighten up
as we get through the process.
Thank you. Uh, thank you.
We are now at school board communication.
This is an opportunity for school board members to, um,
make comments, ask questions, uh, uh,
remind people about a meeting or an event, uh, anything, uh,
or something that somebody has attended that they wanted
to, um, highlight.
So do, uh, are there any school board communications?
Uh, member member Kabi? So, thank you, Davidson.
Um, I have two things.
One is another update that I forgot to put on
my student report, but one was an update about, uh,
KA elementary school.
They were also able to go to the Children's Museum
to see the, like Waki exhibition.
And they were also there at the Little Mermaid play.
And their dental clinic is also at 37 students.
So they're able to, you know, get, go
to their dentist appointments
and, you know, learn how to take care of their teeth.
Um, and my second thing was just like,
I guess it's like a question,
but it's okay if there's no answer to it.
But when Ms. Carlisle was doing a presentation on like,
the ELO stuff, and like ELLs are very important, especially
to me, like I do the law one
and the, uh, youth, uh, doula initiative.
And I can definitely see that it takes a huge toll on Ms.
Carlisle doing it on her own,
because I also work alongside with her as, like,
she's our BSU advisor, but she's also a teacher
and she does JMG and stuff like that.
So I was wondering, like, is there a way to have her do,
like, do it in partnership with someone else?
Because like, ELLs are very important,
but that's, I feel like
that's just too much work on someone, you know what I mean?
Like, I wouldn't be able to do that if
We're, we're gonna put you in touch
with the superintendent on that, uh, Angela,
and we, we can see if you can have that conversation.
Okay. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, the only other thing I would add is that I did go
to the Mill Creek tree lighting.
It was incredibly cold, but, uh,
but it was really beautiful as always.
It's always a great annual event.
Um, it's wonderful to hear the students, singers who, uh,
who who are always performing
and, um, to see Santa Claus, you know, uh, all, all the,
the lighting that happens
and the great countdown of 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
Um, but it was, it was beautiful.
And, uh, I, I hope that some of you were able to make it
as well, seeing no other comments.
We can Wait. I
Have a Comment. Oh, I'm sorry.
Um, I just wanted to say that I can also attest
to the great work Ms.
Carlisle is doing. I had the opportunity to do an ELO myself
and volunteer at Mercy Hospital, uh,
which was really eyeopening for me
and confirmed, uh, that I want
to pursue a career in medicine.
Um, so I just wanna shout her out
and say that she's doing great things
and anything that we can do as a community
to support her, I think would be really amazing.
So thank you.
Thank you. Um, member Holman? Yes,
Thank you. Um, I
just wanna say, um, uh, thanks
to the people who've given us a voter of support
and, uh, for our new members, uh, I can feel
that we've got great energy on the board at this time.
And, um, this is, you know,
perhaps my last year on the board,
it's end of my second term.
And, uh, I do feel like we've some really important issues
coming ahead that I want us to deal with.
I, the, the foundation is one of them.
Um, this athletic school, athletic,
the middle school athletic fields is another, um, uh,
we have need to pick back up where we left off.
And I know that our chair, our chair also thinks this too,
where we left off with boundaries
and configurations, AKA redistricting in the interest,
in the best interest of all of our school, all of our
school community, all
of our students really is what it comes down to.
And, uh, also I think there's a great
interest in looking at the question of phones in schools.
So we have a really exciting stuff
that can come up on our agenda.
I'm really looking forward to it.
And thanks to all of you for your support.
Uh, thank you member Holman.
And I will just say that that was exactly the issue
of boundaries of configurations,
which I would now call something different,
is why I spoke about the work of, uh, Jimenez Apollo.
So I'm, I'm going to be relying on him to, uh, take
that ball and, um, continue to move us forward.
So, um, are there any other
comments, questions?
Um, member hall, member Richardson, just a
Quick, um, welcome to the new members.
It's nice to have you up here.
Thank you. Anything else? Okay.
We can accept a motion to adjourn.
Somebody wants to adjourn. Thank you. Thank you, George.
Uh, member Rich and seconded by, uh, Richardson.
And, uh, all those in favor of adjournment.
Good. Unanimous. Thank you. I've
Yet to be an a meeting.
The second was Richardson at
7:39 PM
We and the skeleton, whatever, like.